








  VOLUME – I
SECTION – 3  EVALUATION AND QUALIFICATION CRITERIA 
EVALUATION PARAMETERS
Only those Bidders/Consortium who meet the Minimum Eeligibility Criteria specified in Clause 1.6 of Section -1, Volume-I shall qualify for evaluation. Tenders from Bidders/ Consortium who do not meet these criteria shall be rejected.
The Bidder’s competence and capability is proposed to be established by the following parameters:
Technical Capacity; and
Financial Capacity
TECHNICAL & FINANCIAL CRITERIA FOR THE PURPOSE OF EVALUATION
This Section contains all the methods, criteria, and requirements that the Employer shall use to evaluate the Bids. The information to be provided in relation to each requirement and the definitions of the corresponding terms are included in the respective Forms.
ELIGIBILITY AND QUALIFICATION CRITERIA
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS
DOCUMENTATION
S. No.
Subject
Requirement

Submission Requirements
1
ELIGIBILITY
1.1
Conflict between Applicant and Specialised Subcontractor
No Applicant is a Specialised Subcontractor of another Applicant or vice versa in accordance with Clause 1.5.5 Section 1.
Must meet the requirements
FORM-1  
1.2
Conflict of Interest
No Conflicts of Interest in accordance with Clause 1.5.7 and 1.5.8, Section 1.
Must meet the requirements
FORM-1  
1.3
Barred by Government
Not barred by Government as on the Tender Due Date. (“the Government” means Central/State Government in India, or any entity controlled by it) TA \s "Application Due Date" 
Must meet the requirements
FORM-12  
2
HISTORICAL CONTRACT NON-PERFORMANCE, PENDING LITIGATION AND LITIGATION HISTORY
2.1
History of Non-Performing Contracts
Non-performance of a Contract did not occur as a result of Contractor’s default from Date to Date
Must meet the requirement
FORM-11A
2.2
Pending Litigation
Tenderer’s financial position and prospective long term profitability still sound according to criteria established in Criteria No. 3.2 (ii) below and assuming that 50% of all pending litigation will be resolved against the Tenderer
Must meet the requirement
FORM-11B NOTEREF _Ref465170930 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 3 
2.3
Litigation History
No consistent history of court/arbitral award decisions against the Tenderer from  Date to Date.
Must meet the requirement
FORM-11C NOTEREF _Ref465170930 \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 3
3
FINANCIAL SITUATION AND PERFORMANCE
3.1
Financial Capabilities
The audited balance sheets for the last 3 (three) financial years shall be submitted and must demonstrate the current soundness of the Tenderer’s financial position.

* Note: 1. The information submitted by the Tenderer must mention Total Assets, Current Assets; Total Liabilities; Current Liabilities; Share Capital, Profit Before Taxes, Profit After Taxes.
 
2. The financial statements should be on the name of the Tenderer (Contracting company) and not on the name of the parenting company or sister company.
Must be submitted
Audited balance sheets/financial statements of the last three years
3.2

(i) The Tenderer shall demonstrate that it has access to, or has available liquid assets, lines of credit, and other financial means (independent of any contractual advance payment) sufficient to meet the construction cash flow requirements for the subject Contract after meeting its cash flow requirements for contracts currently in progress and for future contract commitments.
Must meet the requirement
FORM-6A  
&
FORM-6B


(ii) The Tenderer shall have positive Net Worth at the close of the latest financial year
Must meet the requirement
FORM-6A 
3.3
Average Annual Construction Turnover
Minimum Average Annual Construction Turnover  Turnover: The bidder should have satisfactorily completed as prime contractor in civil engineering category in any one financial year ending Dtae of value not less than Rs.XXX Crores.
Must meet the requirement
FORM-4 
3.4
Available Bid Capacity
The Tenderer shall have minimum Available Bid Capacity of INR XXXX Crores.
Must meet the requirement
As per Clause 1.6.1, Section 1
3.5
Net Worth
The Tenderer shall have positive Net Worth at the close of the latest financial year
Must meet the requirement
Tender FORM-6A for the latest financial year 
3.6
Solvency Certificate







Solvency certificate from bankers for INR XXX Crores not older than six months as on the date of submission of the bid.



Must meet the requirement
As per Clause 1.6.1, Section 1
4
EXPERIENCE
4.1
Similar Work(s) Experience
The Bidder should have satisfactorily completed the Similar Works as mentioned below, in any one year, during the last 5 years ending Date of costing not less than Rs. XXX Crores.

“Similar Work” means Construction of Marine works like Fishing Harbours, etc.
 Must meet the requirement

FORM-5A and 5B along with Notarized copy or original of the Completion Certificates, which shall invariably contain completion cost, date of commencement, date of completion, Scope of works executed and Scanned copy of Original TDS Certificate if the Work Completion   Certificate from any Private Organization is submitted for the above purpose, in case of Pvt experience the experience certificate shall be signed by charted accountant of the clients organization for whom the work was executed.

4.2
Experience in Specialized Works
The Bidder should have executed the following quantities of works, in any one year, during the last 5 years ending Date


A)
Construction of Breakwater having completed of at least XXXX Rmt, 

Must meet the requirement

This requirement can also be met through a Specialised Subcontractor
Form-5C along with Notarized copy or original of the Completion Certificates, which shall invariably contain completion cost, date of commencement, date of completion, Scope of works and Scanned copy of Original TDS Certificate if the Work Completion   Certificate from any Private Organization is submitted for the above purpose.
B)
Capital of Dredging at least XXXX Cum for creating water depth of XXX below chart datum

Must meet the requirement

This requirement can also be met through a Specialised Subcontractor
C)
Construction of piling work with minim XX completed of XXXX 
Must meet the requirement.

This requirement can also be met through a Specialised Subcontractor.
5
DEPLOYMENT OF EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL
5.1
Proposed Equipment
Details of the Minimum Proposed Equipment for completion of the Works
Must meet the requirements.
FORM-8
5.2
Key Personnel
Details of the proposed Key Personnel for completion of the Works
Must meet requirement
FORM-9

DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMITTED 
The bidder shall submit the following documents: 
a) Duly Signed Integrity Pact as per format given in Form-13 of Section-4 [Integrity Pact]
b) Bid Bond as per format given in Form-B of Section-10 [Format for Bid Bond in the Form of Bank Guarantee]
c) Demand Draft/ Pay Order/Banker’s Cheque towards Cost of Tender Document.
d) Letter of Submission addressed to the Employer as per the format given in Form-1
e) Duly filled and signed by the following Forms of Section-4:
Form-3 Organization Details
Form-7 Proposed Approach and Methodology for Execution of Works
Form-10 Proposed Site Organization
Form-16 Letter of Authority
f) 	A Notarised Copy of the Power of Attorney issued by the Bidder to the authorised signatory of the Tender as per format given in Form-2 [Format for Power of Attorney for signing the Bid].
g) 	A Notarised Copy of the Power of Attorney for the Lead Member of the Consortium issued by all the Members of the Consortium pursuant to Clause 1.6.4 as per format given in Form-15 [Format for Power of Attorney for the Lead Member of Consortium], if applicable.
h) A Notarised Copy of Joint Bidding Agreement entered into by all the Members of the Consortium pursuant to Clause 1.6.4 as per format given Form-14 [Joint Bidding Agreement], if applicable.
i) 	The Original set of RFP Documents downloaded from Employer’s website in its own name together with all Addenda/Corrigenda duly signed on all pages by the Bidder.
j)	 A Declaration that no changes have been made in the Tender Documents downloaded by the Bidder or issued to the Bidder by the Employer, Financial Bid is unconditional, no illegal methods have been used for influencing the Bid Process, disclosure of payments made/proposed to be made to Intermediaries in the Proforma given in Form-12
k) 	Any other document or literature which the Bidder thinks is necessary for proper evaluation of its Tender. The Bidder shall draw special attention of the Employer to such document or literature in its forwarding letter as per Form-1.
l) 	Duly filled Check List for submission of Bids in Form-19.
Any failure by the Bidder to submit the foregoing documents in Cover -1 will render the Bidder ineligible for participation in the Bidding Process.















	
 Related to Construction Business only.
 Non-performance, as decided by the Employer, shall include all contracts where: (a) non-performance was not challenged by the Contractor, including through referral to the dispute resolution mechanism under the respective contract, and (b) contracts that were so chllenged but fully settled against the Contractor. Non-performance shall not include contracts where Employer’s decision was overruled by the dispute resolution mechanism. Non-performance must be based on all information on fully settled disputes or litigation, i.e. dispute or litigation that has been resolved in accordance with the dispute resolution mechanism under the respective contract and where all appeal instances available to the Tenderer have been exhausted.
 FORM-11(A), (B) and (C) should be duly certified by the Statutory Auditors of the Tenderer.
 The Tenderer shall provide accurate information on the related Application Form about any litigation or arbitration resulting from contracts completed or ongoing under its execution from 1st January 2022 to 31st March 2025. A consistent history of awards against the Tenderer may result in disqualification of the Tenderer.
 If the Annual Construction Turnover is not clearly stated in the Audited Balance Sheets / Financial Statements of the Tenderer, specific certificate issued by its Statutory Auditors, should be submitted.     
 The Similar Works experience(s) of Group Companies, Parent Companies or Sister Companies shall not be considered for evaluation. The Tenderers are advised to strictly adhere to this requirement and submit the Similar Works experience(s) from the client(s) of the Tenderer. 










EPC Contract Basis
Tender Document (TD)



Page  PAGE 7 of 7
                                                                             Section-3



