







VOLUME – III
SECTION – 9 SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
59
WATER SUPPLY
5
60
ELECTRICAL POWER
5
61
LAND
5
62
ROADS
6
63
PAYMENT FOR CAMP CONSTRUCTION
7
64
EXPLOSIVE AND FUEL STORAGE TANKS
7
65
LABOUR
7
66
SAFETY MEASURES
8
67
FAIR WAGE CLAUSE
8
68
INDEMNITY BOND
9
69
COMPLIANCE WITH LABOUR REGULATIONS
9
70
SALIENT FEATURES OF SOME MAJOR LABOUR
10
71
LIABILITIES OF THE CONTRACTOR
12
72
DELETED
13
73
DELETED
13
74
RELATIONSHIP
13
75
PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PREMISES
13
76
WORK DURING NIGHT OR ON SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS
13
77
DELETED
14
78
DELETED
14
79
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
14
80
DELETED
14
81
DELETED
14
82
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
14
83
CONTRACT DOCUMENTS AND MATERIALS TO BE TREATED AS CONFIDENTIAL
15
84
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTOR
15
85
SECURITY MEASURES
15
86
DELETED
16
87
SANITATION
16
88
TRAINING OF PERSONNEL
16
89
ECOLOGICAL BALANCE
16
90
PRESERVATION OF EXISTING VEGETATION
17
91
POSSESSION PRIOR TO COMPLETION
18
92
PAYMENT UPON TERMINATION
18
93
ACCESS TO THE CONTRACTOR’S BOOKS
18
94
FORCE MAJEURE
18
95
B.I.S. [I.S.I.] BOOKS AND APSS TO BE KEPT AT SITE GOI/NBC
18
96
VARIATIONS BY WAY OF MODIFICATION, OMISSIONS OR ADDITIONS
18
97
CARE AND DIVERSION OF RIVER/STREAM
19
98
INCOME TAX
19
99
SEIGNIORAGE CHARGES
19
100
SUPPLY OF CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
20
ADDITIONAL SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
1
GENERAL
22
2
DRAWINGS AND DESIGNS
22
3
CONSTRUCTION PROGRAMME
22
4
INSPECTION AND TESTS
23
5
DAMAGE TO WORKS
23
6
EXAMINATION AND TESTS ON COMPLETION
24
7
ROADS
24
8
REGULATIONS AND BYE-LAWS
24
9
PASSING OF FOUNDATION ETC
24
10
SIGNING FIELD BOOKS, LONGITUDINAL SECTIONS, CROSS-SECTIONS AND MEASUREMENT BOOKS
24
11
TEST RESULTS
25
12
CLEANING UP
25
13
COMMUNICATIONS AND NOTICES BY CONTRACTORS
25
14
ALTERATIONS IN SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGNS
26
15
TIME LIMIT FOR UNFORESEEN DISPUTES
26
16
ACTION AND COMPENSATION PAYABLE IN CASE OF BAD WORK
26
17
WORKS TO BE OPEN FOR INSPECTION
27
18
NOTICE TO BE GIVEN BEFORE WORK IS COVERED UP
27
19
CONTRACTOR TO SUPPLY PLANT, LADDERS, SCAFFOLDING ETC
27
20
AUDIT AND TECHNICAL EXAMINATIONS
27
21
DIVERSION OF EXISTING ROADS
28
22
DELETED
28
23
USE OF SITE
28





SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
Water Supply:
The Contractor has to make his own arrangements for water required for the work and to the colonies and work sites, which are to be established by the Contractor.
Electrical Power:
The Contractors will have to make their own arrangements for drawing electric power from the nearest power line after obtaining permission from the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board at his own cost. In case of failure of electricity, the Contractor has to make alternative arrangements for supply of electricity by Diesel Generator sets of suitable capacity at place of work. If the supply is arranged by the Department, necessary Tariff rates shall have to be paid based on the prevailing rates.
The contractor will pay the bills of Electricity Board for the cost of power consumed by him.
The contractor shall satisfy all the conditions and rules required as per Indian Electricity Act 1910 and under rule —45(I) of the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 as amended from time to time and other pertinent rules.
The power shall be used for bonafide Departmental works only.
Electric Power for Domestic Supply:
	•	The contractor has to make his own arrangements for the supply of electric power for domestic purposes and the charges for this purpose have to be paid by him at the rates as fixed by the Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board from time to time.
	•	The contractor will have to make his own arrangements to lay and maintain the necessary distribution lines and wiring for the camp at his own cost. The layout and the methods of laying the lines and wiring shall have the prior approval of the Employer/ Employer’s representative. All camp area shall be properly electrified. All lines, streets, approaches for the camp etc., shall be sufficiently lighted for the safety of staff and labour of the contractor, at the cost of the Contractor and it will be subject to the approval of the Employer/ Employer’s representative.
Land:
 Land for Contractor’s Use:
The contractor will be permitted to use Government land for execution of work. The contractor shall have to make his own arrangements for acquiring and clearing the site, leveling, providing drainage and other facilities for labour staff colonies, site office, work-shop or stores and for related activities. The Contractor shall apply to the Department within a reasonable time after the award of the contract and at least 30 days in advance of its use, the details of land required by him for the work at site and the land required for his camp and should any private land which has not been acquired, be required by the contractor for his use. The same may be acquired by the contractor at his own cost by private negotiations and no claim shall be admissible to him on this account.
The Employer/ Employer’s representative reserves the right to refuse permission for use of any government land for which no claim or compensation shall be admissible to the contractor. The contractor shall, however, not be required to pay cost or any rent for the Government land given to him.
Surrender of Occupied Land:
	•	The Government land as here in before mentioned shall be surrendered to the Employer/ Employer’s representative within seven days, after issue of completion certificate. Also no land shall be held by the contractor longer than the Engineer-in-Charge shall deem necessary and the contractor shall on the receipt of due notice from the Employer/ Employer’s representative, vacate and surrender the land which the Engineer-in-Charge may certify as no longer required by the Contractor for the purpose of the work.
	•	The. contractor shall make good to the satisfaction of the Employer/ Employer’s representative any damage to areas, which he has to return or to other property or land handed over to him for purpose of this work. Temporary structures may be erected by the contractor for storage sheds, offices, residences etc., for non-commercial use, with the permission of the Employer/ Employer’s representative on the land handed over to him at his own cost. At the completion of the work these structures shall be dismantled site cleared and handed over to the. Employer/ Employer’s representative The land required for providing amenities will be given free of cost from Government lands if available otherwise the contractor shall have to make his own arrangements.
Contractor not to Dispose off Spoil etc.:
The contractor shall not dispose off or remove except for the purpose of fulfilment of this contract, sand, stone, clay ballast, earth, trees and shrubs or other materials obtained in the excavation made or lying on the site of the work, and all such materials and produce shall remain property of the Government. The Department may upon request from the contractor, or if so stipulated in the conditions of the contract allow the contractor to use any of the above materials for the works either free of cost or after payment as may be specifically mentioned or considered necessary during the execution of the work.
Roads:
In addition to existing public roads and roads Constructed by Government, if any, in work area all additional approach roads inside work area and camp required by the Contractor shall be constructed and maintained by him at his own cost. The layout design, construction and maintenance etc. of the roads shall be subject to the approval of the Employer/ Employer’s representative. The contractor shall permit the use of these roads by the Government free of charge.
It is possible that work at, or in the vicinity of the work site will be performed by the Government or by other contractors engaged in work for the Government during the contract period. The contractor shall without charge permit the government and such other contractor and other workmen to use the access facilities including roads and other facilities, constructed and acquired by the contractor for use in the performance of the works.
The contractor’s heavy construction traffic or tracked equipment shall not traverse any public roads or bridges unless the contractor has made arrangement with the authority concerned. In case contractor’s heavy construction traffic or tracked equipment is not allowed to traverse any public roads or bridges and the contractor is required to make some alternative arrangements, no claim on this account shall be entertained.
The contractor is cautioned to take necessary precautions in transportation of construction materials to avoid accidents.
Payment for Camp Construction:
No payment will be made to the contractor for construction, operation and maintenance of camp and other camp facilities and the entire cost of such work shall be deemed to have been included in the Bided rate for the various items of work in the schedule of quantities and bids.
Explosive and Fuel Storage Tanks:
No explosive shall be stored within 1/2 (half) KM of the limit of the camp sites. The storage of gasoline and other fuel oils or of Butane, Propane and other liquefied petroleum gases, shall confirm to the regulations of Andhra Pradesh State Government and Government of India. The tanks, above ground and having capacity in excess of 2000 liters, shall not be located within the camp area, nor within 200m, of any building.
Labour:
The contractor shall, make his own arrangements for the engagement of all staff and labour, local or other, and for their payment, housing, feeding and transport.
Labour importation and amenities to labour and contractor’s staff shall be to the contractor’s account. His quoted percentage shall include the expenditure towards importation of labour amenities to labour and staff;
The contractor shall, if required by the Employer/ Employer’s representative, deliver to the Employer/ Employer’s representative a written in detail, is such form and at such intervals as the Employer/ Employer’s representative may prescribe, showing the staff and the numbers of the several classes of labour from time to time employed by the contractor on the Site and such information respecting Contractor’s Equipment as the Employer/ Employer’s representative may require.
Transportation of Labour:
The contractor shall make his own arrangement for the daily transportation of the labour and staff from labour camps colonies to the work spot and no labour or staff of the contractor shall stay at the work spot. No extra payment will be made to the contractor for the above transportation of the labour and his quoted percentage to the work shall include the transportation charges of labour from colonies to work spot and back.
II. The contractor will at all times duly observe the provisions of employment of children Act XXVI of 1938 and any enactment or modification of the same and will not employ or permit any person to do any work for the purpose under the provisions of this agreement in contravention of said Act. The contractor here by agrees to indemnify the department from and against all claims, penalties which may be suffered by the department or any person employed by the department by any default on the part of the contractor in the observance and performance of the provisions of the employment of children Act. XXVI of 1938 or any enactment or modification of the same.
As per Govt. memo No.721/Gr.(I)/81-35, dt:17.11.87. The contractor shall obtain the insurance at his own cost to cover the risk on the works to labour engaged by him during period of execution against fire and other usual risks and produce the same to the Employer/ Employer’s representative concerned before commencement of work.
Safety Measures:
	•	The contractor shall take necessary precautions for safety of the workers and preserving their health while working in such jobs, which require special protection and precautions. The following are some of the measures listed but they are not exhaustive and contractor shall add to and augment these precautions on his own initiative where necessary and shall comply with directions issued by the Employer/ Employer’s representative or on his behalf from time to time and at all times.
	•	Providing protective foot wear to workers situations like mixing and placing of mortar or concrete sand in quarries and places where the work is done under much wet conditions.
	•	Providing protective head wear to workers at places like under ground excavations to protect them against rock falls.
	•	Providing masks to workers at granulates or at other locations where too much fine dust is floating about and sprinkling water at frequent intervals by water hoses on all stone crushing area and storage bins abate to dust.
	•	Getting the workers in such jobs periodically examined for chest trouble due to too much breathing in to fine dust.
	•	Taking such normal precautions like fencing and lightening in excavation of trenches, not allowing rolls and metal parts of useless timber spread around, making danger areas for blasting providing whistles etc.
	•	Supply work men with proper belts, ropes etc., when working in precarious slopes etc.
	•	Avoiding electrical wire etc., as they would electrocute the works.
	•	Taking necessary steps towards training the workers concerned on the machinery before they are allowed to handle them independently and taking all necessary precautions in around the areas where machines hoists and similar units are working.
Fair Wage Clause:
	•	The contractor shall pay not less than fair wages to laborers engaged by him on the work.
	•	“Fair” wages means wages whether for time of piecework notified by the Government from time in the area in which the work is situated.
	•	The contractor shall not with-standing the revisions of any contract to the contrary cause to be paid to the labour, in directly engaged on the work including any labour engaged by the sub-contractor in connection with the said work, as if the labourers had been directly employed by him.
	•	In respect of labour directly or indirectly employed in the works for the purpose of the contractors part of the agreement the contractor shall comply with the rules and regulations on the maintenance of suitable records prescribed for this purpose from time to time by the Government. He shall maintain his accounts and vouchers on the payment of wages to the labourers to the satisfaction of the Employer/ Employer’s representative.
	•	The Employer/ Employer’s representative shall have the right to call for such record as required to satisfy himself on the payment of fair wages to the labourers and shall have the right to deduct from the contract amount a suitable amount for making good the loss suffered by the worker or workers by reason of the “fair wages” clause to the workers.
	•	The contractor shall be primarily liable for all payments to be made and for the observance of the regulations framed by the Govt. from time to time without prejudice to his right to claim indemnity from his sub-contractors.
	•	As per contract labour (Regulation and abolition) Act. 1970 the contractor has to produce the license obtained from the licensing officers of the labour department along with the Bid or at the time of agreement.
	•	Any violation of the conditions above shall be deemed to be a breach of his contract.
	•	Equal wages are to be paid for both men and women if the nature of work is same and similar.
	•	The contractor shall arrange for the recruitment of skilled and unskilled labour local and imported to the extent necessary to complete the work within the agreed period as directed by the Employer/ Employer’s representative in writing.
 Indemnity Bond:  
Name of work : Opening of Sea Mouth into Pulicat Lake at Rayadovuru Village, Vakada Mandal, SPSR Nellore district In Andhra Pradesh on EPC Contract Basis with 18 months defect liability period under EPC system.
I ____________________________________contractor S/o._________________ aged Resident of ________________________ do hereby bind myself to pay all the claims may come (a) under Workmen’s Compensation Act. 1933 with any statutory modification there of and rules there under or otherwise for or in respect of any damage or compensation payable in connection with any accident or injury sustained (b) under Minimum wages Act 1948 (c) under payment of wages Act. 1936 (d) under the Contractor labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act. 1970 by workmen engaged for the performance of the business relating to the above contract ie., Failing such payment of claims of workmen engaged in the above work, I abide in accepting for the recovery of such claims, effected from any of my assets with the departments.  accepting for the recovery of such claims, effected from any of my assets with the departments.
Compliance with Labour Regulations:
During continuance of the contract, the contractor and his sub contractors shall abide at all times by all existing labour enactment and rules made there under, regulations, notifications and bye laws of the State or Central Government or local authority and any other labour law (including rules), regulations, bye laws that may be passed or notifications that may be issued under any labour law in future either by the State or the Central Government or the local authority and also applicable labour regulations, health and sanitary arrangements for workmen, insurance and other benefits. Salient features of some of the major labour laws that are applicable to construction industry are given below. The contractor shall keep the Department indemnified in case any action is taken against Department by the competent authority on account of contravention of any of the provisions of any Act or rules made thereunder, regulations or notifications including amendments. If the Department is caused to pay or reimburse, such amounts as may be necessary to cause or observe, or for non¬observance of the provision stipulated in the notifications/bye laws/Acts/Rules/regulations including amendments, if any, on the part of the contractor, the Engineer-in-charge /Department shall have the right to deduct any money due to the contractor including his amount of performance security. The Department/Engineer-in-Charge shall also have right to recover from the contractor any sum required or estimated to be required for making good the loss or damage suffered by the Department.
The employees of the Contractor and the Sub-contractor in no case shall be treated as the Employees of the Department at any point of time.
Salient Features of some Major Labour Laws Applicable to Establishment Engaged in Buildings and Other Construction Work:
	•	Workmen compensation Act 1923: The Act provides for compensation in case if injury by accident arising out of and during the course of employment.
	•	Payment of Gratuity Act 1972: Gratuity is payable to an employee under the Act on satisfaction of certain conditions on separation if any employee has completed 5 years service or more, or on death, the rate of 15 days wages for every completed year of service. The Act is applicable to all establishments, employing 10 or more employees.
	•	Employees P.F. and Miscellaneous provision Act 1952: The Act provides for monthly contributions by the Department plus workers @ 10% or 8.33%.  The benefits payable under the Act are:
	•	Pension or family pension on retirement or death, as the case may be.
	•	Deposit linked insurance on the death in harness of the worker.
	•	Payment of P.F. accumulation on retirement/death etc.,
	•	Maternity Benefit Act 1951: The Act provides for leave and some other benefits to women employees in case of confinements or miscarriage etc.
	•	Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act 1970: The Act provides for certain welfare measures to be provided by the contractor to contract labour and in case the Contractor fails to provide, the same are required to be provided by the Principal Department by Law. The Principal Department is required to take certificate of Registration and the contractor is required to take license from the designated Officer. The Act is applicable to the establishments or Contractor of Principal Department if they employ 20 or more contract labour.
	•	Minimum wages Act 1948: The Department is supposed to pay not less than the Minimum wages fixed by appropriate Government as per provisions of the Act if the employment is a scheduled employment construction of Buildings, Roads, Runways are scheduled employment.
	•	Payment of wages Act 1936: It lays down as to by what date the wages are to be paid, when it will be paid and what deductions can be made form the wages of the workers.
	•	Equal Remuneration Act 1979: The Act provides for payment of equal wages for work of equal nature to Male or Female workers and for not making discrimination against Female employee in the matters of transfers, training and promotions etc.
	•	Payment of Bonus Act 1965: The Act Is applicable to all establishments employing 20 or more employees. The Act provides for payment of annual bonus subject to a minimum of 8.33% of wages and maximum of 20% of wages to employees drawing Rs. 3500/- per month or less. The bonus to be paid to employees getting Rs.2500/-per months or above and up to Rs.3500/- per month shall be worked out by taking wages as Rs.2500/- per monthly only. The Act does not apply to certain establishments. The newly set-up establishments are exempted for five years in certain circumstances. Some of the State Governments have reduced the employment size from 20 to 10 for the purpose of applicability of this Act.
	•	Industrial Disputes Act 1947: The Act lays down the machinery and procedure for resolution of Industrial disputes, in what situations a strike or lock- out becomes illegal and what are the requirements for laying off or retrenching the employees or closing down the establishment.
	•	Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act 1946: It is applicable to all establishments employing 100 or more workmen’ (employment size reduced by some of the State and Central Government to 50). The Act provides for laying down rules governing the conditions of employment by the Department on matters provided in the Act and get the same certified by the designated Authority.
	•	Trade Unions Act 1926: The Act lays down the procedure for registration of trade unions of workmen and Departments. The Trade Unions registered under the act have been given certain immunities from civil and criminal liabilities.
	•	Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act 1986: The Act prohibits employment of children below 14 years of age in certain occupations and processes and provides for regulation of employment of children in all other occupations and processes, Employment Child Labour is prohibited in Building and Construction Industry regulation of employment of children in all other occupations and processes, Employment Child Labour is prohibited in Building and Construction Industry.
	•	Inter-State Migrant workmen’s (Regulation of Employment & Conditions of service) Act 1979: The Act applicable to an establishment, which employs 5 or more inter-state migrant workmen through an intermediary (who has recruited workmen in one state for employment in the establishment situated in another State). The inter State migrant workmen, in an establishment to which this Act becomes applicable, are required to be provided certain facilities such as housing, medical aid, travelling expenses from home up to the establishment and back, etc.
	•	The Building and Other Construction workers (regulation of Employment and conditions of service) Act 1996 and the Cess Act of 1996: All the establishments who carryon any building or other construction work and employs 10 or more workers are covered under this Act. All such establishments are required to pay cess at the rate not exceeding 1% of the cost of construction as may be modified by the Government. The Department of the establishment is required to provide safety measures at the Building or construction work and other welfare measures, such as Canteens, First-aid facilities, Ambulance, Housing accommodations for workers near the work place etc. The Department to whom the Act applies has to obtain a registration certificate from the Registering Officer appointed by the Government.
	•	Factories Act 1948: The Act lays down the procedure for approval of plans before setting up a factory, health and safety provisions, welfare provisions, working hours, annual earned leave and rendering information regarding accidents or dangerous occurrences to designated authorities. It is applicable to premises employing 10 person or more with aid of power or 20 or more persons without the aid of power engaged in manufacturing process.
Liabilities of the Contractor:
Accident Relief and Workmen Compensation:
The contractor should make all necessary arrangements for the safety of workmen on the occurrence of the accident, which results in the injury or death of any of the workmen employed by the contractor, the contractor shall within 24 hours of the happenings of the accident and such accidents should intimate in writing to the Employer/ Employer’s representative of the Department the act of such accident. The contractor shall indemnify Government against all loss or damage sustained by the Government resulting directly or indirectly from his failure to give intimation in the manner aforesaid including the penalties or fines if any payable by Govt. as a consequence of Govt. failure to give notice under workmen’s compensation Act or otherwise conform to the provisions of the said Act in regard to such accident.
In the event of an accident in respect of which compensation may become payable under the workmen’s compensation Act VIII 23 whether by the contractor, by the Government it shall be lawful for the Employer/ Employer’s representative to retain such sum of money which may in the opinion of the Employer/ Employer’s representative be sufficient to meet such liability. The opinion of the Executive Engineer shall be final in regard to all matters arising under this clause.
The contractor shall at all times indemnify the Govt. of A.P. against all claims which may be made under the workmen’s compensation act or any statutory modification
	•	The contractor shall, at all times, maintain on the works, staff of qualified Engineers, and Supervisors of sufficient experience of similar other jobs to assure that the quality of work turned out shall be as intended in the specifications. The contractor shall also maintain at the works, a Work Manager or sufficient status, experience and office and duly authorize him to deal with all aspects of the day-today work. All communications to any commitments by the Work Manager shall be considered as binding on the Contractor.
	•	The Contractor shall at all times submit details of skilled and unskilled labour and equipment employed to the Engineer-in-Charge in prescribed proforma as he may require to assess and ensure the proper progress of work.
	•	If the contractor does not employ the technical person agreed to on the work a fine of Rs.25,000/- will be imposed. If he does not employ for 30 days, thereafter it becomes a fundamental breach of contract.
Accommodation and food:
The contractor should arrange accommodation he needs, at his own cost. The contractor shall make his own arrangements for supply of food grains, fuel and other provision to his staff and labourers including controlled commodities.
Deleted.
Deleted.
Relationship:
Contractor shall have to furnish information along with Bid, about the relationship he is having with any officer of the Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh of the rank Assistant Engineer and above engaged in the work and any officer of the rank of Assistant Secretary and above of the Department of Government of Andhra Pradesh.
Protection of Adjoining Premises:
The contractor shall protect adjoining sites against structural, decorative and other damages that could be caused by the execution of these works and make good at his cost any such damages.
Work During Night or on Sundays and Holidays:
The works can be allowed to be carried out during night, Sundays or authorised holidays in order to enable him to meet the schedule targets and the work shall require MORT&H round the clock working keeping in view:
	•	The provisions of relevant labour laws being adhered to:
	•	Adequate lighting, supervision and safety measures are established to the satisfaction of the Employer/ Employer’s representative and
	•	The construction programme given by the Contractor and agreed upon by the Employer/ Employer’s representative envisages such night working or working during Sundays or authorized holidays.
	•	The construction programme given by the Contractor and agreed upon by the Employer/ Employer’s representative envisages such night working or working during Sundays or authorized holidays.
The contractor shall deposit materials for the purpose of the work on such parts only of the ground as may be approved by the Employer/ Employer’s representative before starting work. A detailed survey, clearly indicating position and areas where materials shall be stacked and sheds built is to be conducted by the contractor at his own cost and only after obtaining necessary approval of the plan for use of sites by the Employer/ Employer’s representative, the Contractor can use the sites accordingly.
Procurement of blasting materials and its storage is the responsibility of the contractor. The contractor shall engage licensed blaster for blasting operation. The contractor is to act in accordance with Indian Explosive Act and other rules prevailing, during the execution of work. It is the responsibility of the contractor to see, that works by other agencies in the vicinity are not hampered, in such cases if any claim is made by other agencies that should be borne by the contractor. Carriage of blasting materials, from the magazine to the work site, is the responsibility of the contractor.
Deleted.
Deleted.
Plant and Equipment:
The contractor shall have sufficient plant, equipment and labour and shall work such hours and shifts as may be necessary to maintain the progress on the work as per the approval progress schedule. The working and shifts hours shall comply with the Govt. Regulations in force.
It is to expressly and clearly understood that contractor shall make his own arrangements to equip himself with all machinery and special tools and plant for the speedy and proper execution of the work and the department does not undertake responsibility towards their supply.
The department shall supply such of the machinery that may be available on hire basis but their supply cannot be demanded as matter bf right and no delay in progress can be attributed to such non-supply of the plant by the department and the department cannot be made liable for any damage to the contractor. The Contractor shall be responsible for safe custody of the departmental machinery supplied to him (which will be delivered to contractor at the machinery yard at site of work) and he has to make good all damages and losses if any other than fire, wear and tear to bring it to the conditions that existed at the time of issue to the contractor before handing over the same to the department. The hire charges for the machinery handed over to the contractor will be recovered at the rate prevalent at the time of supply. The contractor will have to execute supplemental agreement with Employer/ Employer’s representative at the time of supply of the machinery.
The Acceptance of Departmental Machinery on Hire is Optional to the Contractor.
The contractor shall not deposit materials at any site, which will cause inconvenience to public. The Employer/ Employer’s representative may direct the contractor to remove such materials or may undertake the job at the cost of the contractor.
Deleted.
Deleted.
Conflict of Interest:
Any bribe, commission, gift or advantage given, promised or offered by on behalf of contractor or his partner, agent or servant or any one on his behalf to any officer, servant, representatives, agents of Employer/ Employer’s representative, or any persons on their behalf, in relation to the obtaining or to execution of this, or any other contract with Employer/ Employer’s representative shall in addition to any criminal liability, which it may occur, subject to the cancellation of this or all other contracts and also to payment of any loss or damage resulting from any such cancellation. Employer/ Employer’s representative shall then be entitled to deduct the amount, so payable from any money, otherwise due to the contractor under this or any other contract.
Contract Documents and Materials to be Treated as Confidential:
All documents, correspondences, decisions and orders, concerning the contract shall be considered as confidential and/or restricted in nature by the contractor and he shall not divulge or allow access to them by any unauthorized person.
General obligations of Contractor:
The contractor shall, subject to the provision of the contract and with due care and diligence, execute and maintain the works in accordance with specifications and drawings.
The contractor shall promptly inform the Department and the Employer/ Employer’s representative of any error, omission, fault and such defect in the design of or specifications for the works which are discovered when reviewing the contract documents or in the process of execution of the works.
If Contractor believes that a decision taken by the Employer/ Employer’s representative was either outside the authority given to Employer/ Employer’s representative by the Contract or that the decision was wrongly taken, the decision shall be referred to the technical expert within 14 days of the notification of the Employer/ Employer’s representative decisions
Pending finalization of disputes, the contractor shall proceed with execution of work with all due diligence.
Security measures:
	•	Security requirements for the work shall be in accordance with the Government’s general requirements including provisions of this clause and the Contractor shall conform to such requirements and shall be held responsible for the actions of all his staff, employees and the staff and employees of his sub-contractors.
	•	All contractors’ employees, representatives and sub-contractor’s employees shall wear identifications badges provided by the contractor. Badges shall identify the contractor, showing and employee’s number and shall be worn at all times while at the site. Individual labour will not be required to wear identification badges.
	•	All vehicles used by the contractor shall be clearly marked with contractor’s name.
	•	All contractors’ employees, representatives and sub-contractor’s employees shall wear identifications badges provided by the contractor. Badges shall identify the contractor, showing and employee’s number and shall be worn at all times while at the site. Individual labour will not be required to wear identification badges.
	•	The contractor shall be responsible for the security of the works for the duration of the contract and shall provide and maintain continuously adequate security personnel to fulfill these obligations. The requirements of security measures shall include, but not limited to maintenance of order on the site, provision of all lighting, fencing, guard flagmen and all other measures necessary for the protection of the works within the colonies, camps and elsewhere on the site, all materials delivered to the site, all persons employed in connection with the works continuously throughout working and non working period including nights, Sundays and holidays for duration of the contract.
	•	Other contractors working on the site concurrently with the contractor will provide security for their own plant and materials. However, their security provisions shall in no way relieve the contractor of his responsibilities in this respect
	•	Separate payment will not be made for provision of security services.
Deleted.
Sanitation:
The contractor shall implement the sanitary and watch and ward rules and regulations for all forces employed under this contract and if the Contractor fails to enforce these rules, the Employer/ Employer’s representative may enforce them at the expenses of the Contractor.
Training of personnel:
The contractor, shall, if and as directed by the Employer/ Employer’s representative provide free of any charge adequate facilities, for vocational training of Government Officers, students, Engineers, supervisors, foremen, skilled workman etc. not exceeding six in number at any one time on the contractor’s work. Their salaries, allowances etc. will be borne by the Government and the training schemes will be drawn up by the Employer/ Employer’s representative in consultation with the contractor.
Ecological balance:
	•	The contractor shall maintain ecological balance by preventing de-forestation, water pollution and defacing of natural landscape. The contractor shall so conduct his construction operation as to prevent any unnecessary destruction, scarring, or defacing of the natural surroundings in the vicinity of the work. In respect of the ecological balance, Contractor shall observe the following instructions.
	•	Where unnecessary destruction, scarring, damage or defacing may occur, as result of the operation, the same shall be repaired replanted or otherwise
	•	All trees and shrubbery which are not specifically required to be cleared or removed for construction purposes shall be preserved and shall be protected from any damage that may be caused by the contractor’s construction operation and equipment. The removal of trees and shrubs will be permitted only after prior approval by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. Special care shall be exercised where trees or shrubs are exposed to injuries by construction equipment, blasting, excavating, dumping, chemical damage or other operation and the contractor shall adequately protect such trees by use of protective barriers or other methods approval by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. Trees shall not be used for anchorages. The contractor shall be responsible for injuries to trees and shrubs caused by his operations. The term “injury” shall include, without limitation bruising, scarring, tearing and breaking of roots, trunks or branches. All injured trees and shrubs be restored as nearly as practicable without delay to their original condition at the contractor’s expense.
	•	The contractor’s construction activities shall be performed by methods that will present entrance or accidental spillage of solid matter contaminants, debris and other objectionable pollutants and wastage into river. Such pollutant and waste include earth and earth products, garbage, cement concrete, sewage effluent, industrial wastes, radio-active substances, mercury, oil and other petroleum products, aggregate processing, mineral salts and thermal pollution. Pollutants and wastes shall be disposed off in a manner and at sites approved by the Employer/ Employer’s representative.
	•	In conduct of construction activities and operation of equipments the contractor shall utilize such practicable methods and devices as are reasonably available to control, prevent and otherwise minimize the air pollution. The excessive omission of dust in to the atmosphere will not be permitted during the manufacture, handling and storage of concrete aggregates and the contractor shall use such methods and equipment as a necessary for collection and disposal or prevention of dust during these operation. The contractor’s methods of storing and handling cement shall also include means of eliminating atmospheric discharges of dust, equipment and vehicles that give objectionable omission of exhaust gases shall not be operated. Burning of materials resulting from clearing of trees, bushes, combustible construction materials and rubbish may be permitted Only when atmospheric conditions for burning are considered favourable.
	•	Separate payment will not be made for complying with the provisions of this clause and all cost shall be deemed to have been included in the unit rates and prices included in the contract if any provision is not complied with within a reasonable time even after issue of a notice in this respect, the necessary operations would be carried out by the Employer/ Employer’s representative at the cost of the Contractor, Orders of the Employer/ Employer’s representative in this respect would be final and binding on the contractor.
Preservation of Existing Vegetation:
	•	The contractor will preserve and protect all existing vegetation such as trees, on or adjacent to the site which do not unreasonably interfere with the construction as may be determined by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. The contractor will be held responsible for all unauthorized cutting or damage of trees, including damage due to careless operation of equipment, stockpiling of materials or trekking of grass areas by equipment. Care shall be taken by the Contractor in felling tress authorized for removal to avoid any unnecessary damages to vegetation and tress that are to remain in place and to structures under construction or in existence and to workmen.
	•	All the produce from such cutting of trees by the contractor shall remain the property of Government and shall be properly stacked at site, approved by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. No payment whatsoever, shall be made for such cutting and its stacking by the Contractor. If any produce from such cutting is not handed over to the Government by the contractor, he shall be charged for the same at the rates to be decided by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. The recovery of this amount shall be made in full from the intermediate bill that follows.
	•	The contractor shall also make arrangements of fuel deposits for supply of required fuel for the labourer to be employed for cooking purpose at his own cost in order to prevent destruction of vegetation growth in the surrounding area of the work site.
Possession Prior to Completion:
The Employer/ Employer’s representative shall have the right to take possession of or use any completed part of work or works or any part there of under construction either temporarily or permanently. Such possession or use shall not be deemed as an acceptance of any work either completed or not completed in accordance with the contract with in the interest of Clause 28 of APSS except where expressly otherwise specified by the Employer/ Employer’s representative.
Payment upon Termination:
If the contract is terminated because of a fundamental breach of contract by the contractor, the Employer/ Employer’s representative shall issue a certificate for the value of the work done less advance payment received upon the date of the issue of the certificate and less the percentage to apply to the work not completed as indicated in the contract data. Additional liquidated damages shall not apply. If the total amount due to the Department exceeds any payment due to the contractor the difference shall be a debt payable to the Department. In case of default for payment within 28 days from the date of issue of notice to the above effect, the contractor shall be liable to pay interest at 12% per annum for the period of delay.
Access to the Contractor’s Books:
Whenever it is considered necessary by the Engineer-in-Charge to ascertain the actual cost of execution of any particular extra item of work or supply of the plant or material on which advance is to be made or of extra items or claims, he shall direct the contractor to produce the relevant documents such as payrolls, records of personnel, invoices of materials and any or all data relevant to the item or necessary to by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. and the Engineer-in-Charge’s representative and by any other persons authorised by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. in writing.
Force Majeure.
In this clause, “Force Majeure” means an exceptional event or Majeure circumstances:
	•	which is beyond a party’s control,
	•	which such party could not reasonably have provided against before entering into the Contract,
	•	which, having arisen, such party could not reasonably have avoided or overcome, and
	•	Which is not substantially attributable to the other party.
Force Majeure may include, but is not limited to, exceptional events or circumstances of the kind listed below, so long as conditions (a) to (d) above are satisfied:
	•	War, hostilities (whether war be declared or not), invasion, act of foreign enemies,
	•	Munitions of war, explosive materials, ionizing radiation or contamination by radio-activity, except as may be attributable to the contractor’s use of such munitions, explosives, radiations or radio- activity, and
	•	Natural catastrophes such as earthquake, hurricane, typhoon or volcanic activity
	•	Unprecedented floods
Notice of Force Majeure
If a party is or will be prevented from performing any of its obligations under the contract by Force Majeure, then it shall give notice to the other party of the event or circumstances constituting the Force Majeure and shall specify the obligations, the performance of which is or will be prevented. The notice shall be given within
14 days after the party became aware or should have become aware, of the relevant event or circumstance constituting Force Majeure.
The party shall, having given notice, be excused performance of such obligations for so long as such Force Majeure prevents it from performing them.
Duty to Minimize Delay
Each Party shall at all times use all reasonable endeavors to minimize any delay in the performance of the contract as a result of Force Majeure.
A party shall give notice to the other party when it ceases to be affected by the Force Majeure.
Allocation of costs arising out of Force Majeure
Upon occurrence of any Force Majeure event mentioned above, the Parties shall bear their respective costs and no Party shall be required to pay to the other Party any costs thereof.
For the avoidance of doubt, Force Majeure Costs may include interest payments on debt, operation and maintenance expenses, any increase in the cost of construction of Works on account of inflation and all other costs directly attributable to the Force Majeure event.
Termination Notice for Force Majeure event
If a Force Majeure event subsists for a period of 180 (one hundred and eighty) days or more within a continuous period of 365 (three hundred and sixty five) days, either Party may in its discretion terminate this Agreement by issuing a termination notice to the other Party without being liable in any manner whatsoever, save as provided in this Article, and upon issue of such termination notice, this Agreement shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, stand terminated forthwith; provided that before issuing such termination notice, the Party intending to issue the termination notice shall inform the other Party of such intention and grant 15 (fifteen) days’ time to make a representation, and may after the expiry of such 15 (fifteen) days period, whether or not it is in receipt of such representation, in its sole discretion issue the termination notice.
Dispute resolution
In the event that the Parties are unable to agree in good faith about the occurrence or existence of a Force Majeure event, such Dispute shall be finally settled in accordance with the dispute resolution procedure; provided that the burden of proof as to the occurrence or existence of such Force Majeure event shall be upon the Party claiming relief and/or excuse on account of such Force Majeure event.
B.I.S. [I.S.I.] Books and APSS to be Kept at Site: GOI/NBC
A complete set of Indian Standard specifications, NBC and any other relevant literature referred to in “Technical Specifications” and A.P.S.S. shall be kept at site for reference.
Variations by Way of Modification, Omissions or Additions:
For all modifications, omissions from or additions to the drawings and specifications, the Employer/ Employer’s representative will issue revised plans, or written instructions, or both and no modification, omission or addition shall be made unless so authorized and directed by the Employer/ Employer’s representative. in writing.
The Employer/ Employer’s representative shall have the privilege of ordering modifications, omission or additions at any time before the completion of the work and such orders shall not operate to annual those portions of the specifications with which said changes do not conflict.
Employer/ Employer’s representative Decision:
It shall be accepted as in separable part of the contract that in matters regarding materials, workmanship, removal of improper work, interpretation of the contract drawings and contract specification, mode of the procedure and the carrying out of the work, the decision of the Engineer-in-Charge, which shall be given in writing shall be binding on the contractor.
Care and Diversion of River/Stream:
The contractor shall submit details regarding the diversion and care of river or stream during construction of the work along with a separate print-out of the time table showing earliest and latest start and finish dates of various activities. He should submit a detailed layout plan with drawings for the diversion and care of river during construction of work. The above arrangements shall be at contractor’s cost.
Income Tax:
	•	Income Tax will be recovered as per rules in force. 
	•	Income Tax clearance certificate should be furnished before the payment of final bill.
	•	The contractor’s staff, personnel and labour will be liable to pay personnel income taxes in respect of their salaries and wages as are chargeable under the laws and regulations for the time being in force, and the contractor shall perform such duties in regard to such deductions thereof as may be imposed on him by such laws and regulations.
Seigniorage Charges:
Seigniorage charges reimbursed as per actuals on production of proof of payment. 
The rates are liable to be revised and amended from ~time to time by the State Government, by notification in the ‘Andhra Pradesh Gazette’. If the revised Seigniorage fee is more than the above mentioned, the recovery from the contractor’s bills is as per revised rates.
For the Sand and other materials consumed in all Government  works by the contractors, one time penalty equivalent to normal seigniorage charges may be recovered from the work bills by the consuming department in case the  procurement of materials is without valid permits issued by the concerned Assistant Director of Mines & Geology.
Goods & Service  Tax: GST at the rate of 18.0 % on all the items of works. Any changes made in the GST structure from time to time shall be effected.
VAT/GST to applicable wherever it is applicable.
The contractor should produce a valid Sales Tax Clearance Certificate before the payment of the final bill, otherwise payment to the contractor will be withheld.
Supply of construction materials:
	•	The contractor has to make his own arrangements for procurements, supply and use of construction materials.


ADDITIONAL SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
	•	General:
The special conditions are supplementary instructions to the Contractors and would form part of the contract.
	•	Drawings and Designs:
Drawings given, listed and indexed in volume II will form part of the contract.
The contractor shall use guidelines in the relevant ISI codes/circulars issued by the department from time to time for various components of the works.
All the further studies, layout drawings and modifications if required to be prepared for taking up execution of the work, shall be prepared by the contractor and shall be got approved from the competent authority Superintending Engineer, APMB. For the purpose of approval the contractor shall submit 10 copies to the Engineer-in-Charge.
The contractor shall prepare ten copies of approved drawings supplied to him by the Employer with one soft copy.
The contractor is expected to organize his work to the best of his knowledge so that final draft of various layouts will be submitted to competent authority within stipulated time period.
All the studies layouts, which have been submitted to the Employer, shall become the absolute property of Employer under the copy right act and the contractor shall not use the same in whole or part thereof elsewhere for any purpose without explicit written permission from the Employer.
In all difference of opinion on technical matters between the contractor and the Engineer-in-Charge the decision given by the Superintending Engineer, APMB and Employer shall be final and binding on the contractor.
Payments to the contractor in above aspects shall be finalized by the Employer / Engineer-in-Charge from the provisions under Section-5, if necessary by concluding supplementary agreement for the same.
	•	Construction Programme:
The contractor shall submit “Construction Programme” showing quantity wise sequence of operations within fifteen days of commencement date and should get the programme approved from the Employer. Along with the above he will also submit programme of bringing requisite tools and plant, machinery to be engaged by him to the site of work.
Contractor shall also prepare his own month wise (detailed week wise), item wise physical construction programme, prepared with computer aided project management software to generate bar chart based on network technique as per approved quantities of different items without modifying date of work order (start date) and stipulated date of completion (end date) within fifteen days of commencement date and get it approved from Employer. The programme shall be as per work completion schedule. The contractor shall submit weekly progress report to Engineer-in-Charge in approved format of report regularly.
Action when the progress of any crucial item of work is unsatisfactory:- If the progress of a crucial item of work, which is important for timely completion of work is unsatisfactory, the Engineer-in-Charge shall not withstanding, that the general progress of work is satisfactory, in accordance with relevant clause be entitled to take action under clause 26.2 of G.C.C after giving the contractor 7 days’ notice in writing and the contractor will have no claim for compensation for any loss sustained by owing to such action.
	•	Inspection and Tests:
Except as otherwise provided in here of all materials and workmanship. If not otherwise designated by the specifications, shall be subject to inspection, examination and test by the Engineer-in-Charge or his representative at any and all times during manufacture and / or construction and at any / all places where such manufacture or construction are carried on. The Engineer-in-Charge shall have the right to reject defective material and workmanship or require its corrections. Rejected workmanship shall be satisfactorily replaced with proper material without charge thereof and the contractor shall properly segregate and remove the rejected material from the premises, if the contractor fails to proceed at once with the replacement of the rejected material and / or the construction of defective workmanship, the Engineer-in-Charge may replace such material and / or correct such workmanship and charge the cost thereof to the contractor.
The Contractor shall be liable for replacement of defective work up to the time in accordance with the conditions of contract of all work to be done under the contract.
The contractor shall furnish promptly without additional charge all facilities, labour and material necessary for the safe and convenient inspection and tests that may be required by the Engineer-in-Charge. All inspections and tests by the Engineer-in-charge or his representative shall be performed in such a manner as not to unnecessarily delay the work. Special full size and performance test shall be charged with any additional cost of inspection when the contractor does not make materials and workmanship ready at the time of inspection.
	•	Damage to Works:
The works whether fully completed or incomplete, all the works materials, machinery, plants, tools, temporary buildings and other things connected there with shall remain at the risk and in the sole charge of the contractor until the completed work has been delivered to the Engineer-in- Charge. Until such delivery of the completed work the contractor shall at his own cost take all precautions reasonably to keep all the aforesaid works, materials, machinery, plants, temporary buildings and other things connected there with free from any loss or damage and in the event of the same or any part thereof being lost or damaged, he shall forth with reinstate and make good such loss or damage at his own cost.
	•	Examination and Tests on Completion:
On the completion of the work the Engineer-in-Charge shall make such examination and tests of the work as may then seen to him possible, necessary or desirable, and the contractor shall furnish free of cost any materials and labour which may be necessary therefore, and shall facilitate in every way all operations required by the Engineer-in- Charge in making examination and tests.




	•	Roads:
Haul Roads:
The Contractor shall make the work sites accessible to the Employer/Engineer- in-charge or their authorized representatives for inspection by way of constructing / maintaining all weather roads/approaches.
Layout of Construction of Road:
The Contractor shall have to submit detailed plan to the Engineer-in-Charge/ PMC showing the layout of the work site, roads and approach roads proposed by him, before he starts the actual work. Such a road layout road plan will be scrutinized by the Engineer-in-Charge and any modifications suggested by him will be binding on the contractor. If it is decided by the Engineer-in-Charge to have some of the roads proposed by the Contractor as common road for common use of department/Employer and other contractors or convenient and for compact and planned layout of work site, the Contractor will be bound to construct them and allow them to be used simultaneously by other Contractors and departments. In case of disputes, the decision of the Engineer-in-Charge shall be final and the binding on the Contractor.
	•	Regulations and Bye-laws:
The contractor shall conform to the regulation, bye- laws, any other statutory rules made by any local Authorities or by the Government and shall protect and indemnify Government against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such laws, ordinance, regulations, orders, decrees, etc.,
	•	Passing of Foundation etc.:
After the completion of the work of excavation, the same will be checked and passed by the competent authority. No masonry or concrete or back filling shall be laid unless the foundations are so passed. No concreting shall commence, unless the centering and the reinforcement is checked and passed by the Engineer-in-charge.
	•	Signing Field Books, Longitudinal Sections, Cross-Sections and Measurement Books:
Before starting the work, and at the end before the work is covered, levels for plotting the longitudinal sections (along the axis as decided by Engineer-in- Charge or his authorized representative) and cross section of the portion of the work shall be taken by authorized Engineer of the contractor in the presence of the Engineer-in-Charge or his authorized representative and the same shall have to be got attested from the Engineer-in-Charge or his authorized representative in token of acceptance.
If the contractor fails to take measurements and sign them, then the measurements recorded by the Engineer-in-charge, or his authorized representative in the authorized books shall be final and binding on the contractor. For this purpose, suitable date or dates shall be fixed by the Engineer-in-Charge and intimated to the contractor at least three days in advance. If the Contractor or his duly authorized agent fails to attend on the appointed date or dates, the levels and measurements shall be taken in his absence and such levels and measurements and longitudinal sections and cross sections based there on shall be final and binding on the Contractor. The levels will be taken on such alignments and cross sections as will be useful for reference permanently and described under specification for “Excavation”. The point of the locations for the levels will depend upon the roughness of the area and will also be at least in conformity with the requirement of specifications for “Excavation” as far as possible.
The similar procedure for record measurements shall hold good for all other items and activities involved in execution of the work. All the levels/measurements shall be recorded by the Engineer-in-Charge or his authorized representatives in the authorized level / measurement books.
	•	Test Results:
The contractor shall produce results of quality control tests carried out on the works by his staff and the quality audit conducted by the Employer and their authorized representative on these works. If the test result do not fulfill the stipulated criteria laid down in specifications the payment will be limited as per the provisions in the specification(s) and if number of results fail beyond the limit of acceptance, then the contractor shall not be paid unless he rectified all such imperfect work(s). The decision of the Dy. Chief Technical Officer/Chief Technical Officer, APMB in respect of the matters pertaining to the quality control shall be final and binding on the Contractor.
	•	Cleaning Up:
	•	The Contractor shall at all-time keep the construction areas and his colony and storage free from accumulation of waste or rejected materials.
	•	Prior to the completion of the work, the Contractor shall remove all rubbish from and around the promises and all tools, scaffolding equipment and material which are not part of permanent structures.
	•	Communications and Notices by Contractors:
 All communication and or notices pertaining to works and concerning matters, such as passing and approving of foundation, reinforcement, and form work, measurements, mark outs, etc., shall be addressed by the Contractor to an officer not below the rank of Engineer-in-Charge and copy to PMC for his review and recommendation. All such notices communications, etc., shall be addressed in good time so as not to hold up the work.
The contractor shall not be entitled to claim any compensation from department for the loss suffered by him on account of delay by Employer in approval of design, drawing, approval to foundation, approval of alignment etc.
Works to be executed in accordance with Specifications, Drawings, Orders etc.,:-The Contractor shall execute the whole and every part of the work in the most substantial and workmen like manner and both as regards materials and otherwise in every respect in strict accordance with specifications. The Contractor shall also confirm exactly, fully and faithfully to the designs, drawings and instructions in writing relating to the work signed by the Engineer-in-Charge and lodged in his office, and to which the contractor shall be entitled to have access at such office or on the site of the work for the purpose of inspection during office hours, and the contractor shall if he so requires, be entitled at his own expense to make or cause to be made copies of specifications and of all such designs, drawings and instructions as aforesaid.
	•	
	•	Alterations in Specifications and Designs:
The  Engineer-in-Charge  shall have power to make any alterations in, or omissions from, addition to, or substitutions for the original specifications and approved drawings, designs and instructions that may appear to him to be necessary or advisable during the progress of the work and the contractor shall be bound to carry out the work in accordance with any instruction which may be given to him in writing signed by the Engineer-in-Charge and such alterations omissions, additions or substitutions shall not invalidate the contract and any altered, additional or substituted work which the contractor may be directed to do in the manner above specified as part of the work, shall be carried out by the contractor on the same conditions, in all respects on which he agreed to do the main work.
	•	 Time Limit for Unforeseen Disputes:
Any dispute should be brought to the   notice of the Engineer-in-Charge in writing within one month of the occurrence of such disputes.
	•	Action and Compensation Payable in case of Bad Work:
If at any time before security deposit is refunded to the contractor it shall appear to the Engineer-in- Charge or his representatives or his subordinates in-charge of the work that any work has been executed with unsound, imperfect or unskilled workmanship or with materials of inferior quality or, that any materials or articles provided by him for the execution of the work are unsound or of a quality inferior to that contracted for, or otherwise not in accordance with contract, it shall be lawful for the Engineer-in-Charge to intimate this fact in writing to the contractor, and then notwithstanding the fact that the work, materials or articles complained of may have been inadvertently passed, certified and paid for, the contractor shall be bound forthwith to rectify or remove and reconstruct the works specified in  whole or in part as the case may require, or if so required to remove the materials or articles so specified and provide other proper and suitable materials or articles at his own proper charge and cost and in the event of his failing to do so within a period to be specified by the Engineer-in-Charge in the written intimation aforesaid, the contractor shall be liable to pay compensation at the rate of one percent of the amount of the estimate for every day not exceeding ten days during which the failure so continues and in the case of any such failure, the Engineer-in-Charge may rectify or remove and re-execute the work or remove and replace the materials or articles complained of as the case may be at the risk and expense in all respects of the contractor. Should the Engineer- in-Charge consider that any such inferior work or materials as described above may be accepted or made use of, it shall be within his discretion to accept the same after imposing penalty as decided by him?
	•	 Works to be open for Inspection:
All works, under or in course of execution or executed in pursuance of the contract shall at all times be open to the inspection and supervision of the Engineer-in-Charge or his representatives and his subordinates and the contractor shall at all times during the usual working hours and at all other times at which reasonable notice of the intention of Engineer-in- Charge or his representatives or his subordinates to visit the work shall have been given to the contractor either he himself be present to receive orders and instructions, or have a responsible agent duly accredited in writing, present for that purpose.  Orders given to the contractor’s agent shall be considered to  have the same force as if they had been given to the contractor himself.

	•	Notice to be given before Work is Covered Up:
The contractor shall give not less than five days’ notice in writing to the Engineer-in-Charge or his representatives or his subordinate in-charge of the work before covering up or otherwise placing beyond the reach of measurement any work in order that the same may be verified/checked and correct dimensions thereof be taken before the same is so covered up or placed beyond the reach of verification/checking of any work without the consent in writing of the Engineer-in-Charge or his representatives or subordinates in-charge of the work, and if any work shall be covered up or placed beyond the reach of verification/checking without such notice having been given or consent obtained, the same shall be uncovered at the contractor’s expense or in default thereof, no payment or allowance shall be made for such work or materials with which the same was executed.
	•	Contractor to Supply Plant, Ladders, Scaffolding etc.:
The contractor shall supply at his own cost materials, plant, tools appliances, implements, tackle, scaffolding and temporary works requisite for the proper execution of the work, whether original, altered or substituted and whether included in the specifications or other documents forming part of the contract or referred to in these conditions or not, or which may be necessary for the purpose of satisfying or complying with the requirements of the Engineer-in-Charge as to any matter as to which under these conditions he is entitled to be satisfied, or which he is entitled to require together with carriage therefore to and from the work. The contractor shall also supply without charge the requisite number of persons with the means and materials necessary for the purpose of setting out works and counting, weighing & assisting in the checking measurement or examinations at any time and from time to time of the work or materials.  Failing his so doing,  the same may be provided by the Engineer-in-Charge at the expense of the contractor and the expenses may be deducted from any money due to the contractor under the contract, or from his security deposit or the proceeds of sale thereof, or of a sufficient portion thereof Contractor is liable for damages arising from non-provisions of lights, fencing etc., The contractor shall also provide at his own cost, except when the contract specifically provided other wise and except, for payment due under clause 4.28 all necessary fencing and lights required to protect the public from accidents, and shall be bound to bear the expenses or defense of every suit, action or other proceedings of law that may be brought by any person for injury sustained owing to neglect of the above precautions and to pay any damages and costs which may be awarded in any such suit, action or proceedings, to any such persons or which may with the consent of the contractor be paid to compromise any claim by any such person.
	•	Audit and Technical Examinations:
The Employer shall have the right to cause any audit and technical examination of the works and the final bills of the Contractor including all supporting vouchers, abstracts etc., to be made after payment of the final bill and if as a result of such audit and technical examinations any sum is found to have been overpaid in respect of any work done by the contractor under the contract or any work claimed by him to have been done by him under the contract and found not to have been executed, the contractor shall be liable to refund the amount of overpayment and it shall be lawful for Government to recover the same from him in the manner prescribed in relevant clause and if it is found that the contractor was paid less than what was due to him under the contract in respect of any work executed by him under it, the amount of such under payment shall be duly paid by Government to the contractor.
Provided that Govt. shall not be entitled to recover any sum overpaid, nor the contractor shall be entitled to payment of any sum paid short where such payment has been agreed upon between the Engineer-in-Charge on the one hand and the contractor on the other hand, under any term of the contract permitting payment for work after assessment by the Engineer-in-Charge.
	•	Diversion of Existing Roads:
The contractor shall make arrangements to divert all the existing roads falling in the working area with the approved standards as suggested by the Engineer-in- Charge.
	•	Deleted.
	•	Use of Site
	•	All areas of operation including those of his staff and labour colonies handed over to the contractor shall be cleared and handed over back in good condition to the Engineer-in-Charge after completion of works under this contract or the termination of contract whichever is earlier. The Contractor shall make good to the satisfaction of the Engineer-in-Charge any damage or alterations made to areas which he has to hand over back or to other property or land handed over to him for the purpose of this work.
	•	The lands shall as herein before mentioned be handed over back to the Engineer-in-charge immediately after completion of the work under this contract or the termination of the contract whichever is earlier. Also no land shall be held by the Contractor longer than the Engineer-in- Charge shall deem necessary and the Contractor shall on due notice by the Engineer-in- Charge vacate and returned the land which the Engineer- in-Charge may certify as no longer required by the Contractor for the purpose of the works. In case the lands are not handed over back to the Employer within the time limit; specified above penal rent as may be decided by the Engineer-in- Charge will be recovered from the contractor.

	•	The vegetation and forest is noticeable in project area. The Contractor should take utmost care for the preservation of this vegetation and forest. Any damage in this vegetation and forest will have to be compensated by the Contractor and decision of Engineer-in-Charge will be final and binding on Contractor.

