







   VOLUME – III
SECTION – 7 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS










1 SITE ACCEPTANCE AND MOBILISATION/DEMOBILISATION
1.1   Acceptance of Site
In accordance with these specifications the Contractor shall have examined the site and familiarized himself with all existing conditions. He shall accept the site in its existing condition at the time of award of Contract.
1.2   Site Grading
The Contractor shall first clear the area of any obstructions or old structures and carry out a detailed topographicsurvey of the whole area.  Formation level shall be such that there shall be no flooding of the site. It is proposed to provide the formation level of + 3.0 m CD within the port area, up to the boundary wall of the port, road area and locations where buildings haveto be constructed.
1.3   Mobilisation
Upon award of Contract and within a reasonable time, the Contractor shall mobilise all such labour, equipment and materials that are necessary to complete the project in due time.
1.4   Demobilisation
Upon due performance of the contract and Taking Over Certificate is issued to the Contractor, he (the Contractor) shall demobilise all such labour, equipment and materials that are necessary to clear the site within one (1) month to the Employer’s satisfaction.
2 TEMPORARY WORKS
The Contractor shall design, install and maintain all temporary facilities, including a workspace for storage of concrete, steel and other related materials which he may require on or at the site throughout the execution of the work, and remove the same on completion of the works. He shall provide all such buoying, fencing, watching, lighting, connections to public utilities etc. as he needs or as required by authorities and shall install and use his temporary facilities in accordance with all statutory regulations and the requirement of the relevant authorities.
The Contractor shall submit his plan for temporary works to the Employer’s, for approval, within 30 days of award of contract.
Temporary construction shall be adequate for intended uses and for all loads imposed without excessive settlement, deflection or deformation. All parties and members shall be properly strengthened to prevent displacement or failure.
Before or upon completion of work, unless otherwise required or directed, preparatory structures, installations and utility services shall be disconnected and removed from the site.
2.1   Utilities
Temporary utilities used for construction shall have to be adequate for the intended uses and not to be overloaded or otherwise used or arranged in any manner endangering persons, premises or Connections shall beproperly made,lines and wiring securely anchored in place and protected against accidents.
2.1.1   Water
The Contractor shall make his own arrangements for sourcing and distribution of adequate Supply of water for the Works including:
Drinking water: providing and maintaining canisters, coolers or connected drinking fountains of sufficient number to reasonably serve at the Project site.
Water construction: providing and maintaining temporary water service and distribution of adequate capacity for construction purposes.
2.1.2Electricity
The Contractor shall make his own arrangement for power supply. If to be found necessary, the Contractor shall provide and maintain generators including a stand-by generator of adequate capacity to meet additional requirements.
The Contractor shall make his own arrangements as outlined hereunder:
	•	Distribution of adequate capacity power for lighting and other construction needs.
	•	It is necessary to properly and safely perform work in enclosed spaces or under hazardous conditions. Likewise, providing lights for night work/protection as necessary.
Temporary electrical systems shall comply with the local codes and regulations.  
 2.2   Waste and Rubbish
The Contractor shall provide regular clean up and removal of trash, waste, scraps, construction debris, etc. from site and temporary work yard and shall arrange for disposal of waste and rubbish to disposal areas approved by the Employer’s.
2.3   First Aid and Fire Protection
2.3.1   Emergencies
The Contractor shall maintain the list of nearest available police station, hospital or medical services and other emergency services at the Contractor’s Site Office and the same are to be displayed at a number of locations &workplaces. An ambulance vehicle fully equipped with bedding and other skilled and experienced paramedical staffs shall be kept always standby at site round the clock to meet any emergency requirements.
2.3.2   Fire Protection
The Contractor shall establish and submit the following measures to the Employer’s.
	•	Establish appropriate emergency escape routes and procedures.
	•	Maintain fire extinguishers, connected houses and other facilities necessary for reasonable fire fighting action at the site and temporary work yard.
	•	Provide and maintain a first aid kit containing bandages, medicines, sterilised materials and trained people for providing first aid treatment of minor injuries at the Contractor’s Site Office.
2.4   Construction Safeguards
2.4.1Excavations
Trenches intersecting roads shall have to be provided with crossings suitable to carry the type of traffic involved. Vehicular curbs and pedestrian railings shall be provided as necessary. Open pits and openings in floors and other accessible surfaces shall be protected by barricades or railings.
2.4.2   Access
The Contractor shall provide and maintain adequate access to the project site and all areas related to the works at his expense. If existing roads are to be used for access to the site, the Contractor shall take necessary permissions and maintain such roads for the duration of their use.  Access to structures such as scaffolds, ladders, ramps, hoists etc. shall be provided, maintained and operated as necessary.
2.4.3   Storage Areas
Storage and shop areas shall be  provided,  arranged and  maintained at  approved  locations necessary to properly store, handle and fabricate the various materials and equipment required.
2.5Navigational Aids
During the Construction Period, the Contractor shall not interfere with other shipping, navigation of traffic activities.
The Contractor shall provide necessary navigational aids like markers, lights and notices required for the works as required by law, regulations, and authorities jurisdiction covering the works both on land or at seaside. The Contractor shall replace at his own expense/cost any navigational or other facilities damaged.
2.6   Protection of the Public
The Contractor shall provide barricades and enclosures as necessary for public protection.
2.7   Facilities and Equipment for use of the Employer’s and his Representative
The Contractor provides all necessary facilities and equipment at site as per the specific obligation of the contractor enlisted in Article 3 of Special Conditions of Contract (SCC).
3.0 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
The Contractor shall comply with all the conditions stipulated by the relevant statutory and regulatory organizations of Govt. of Karnataka / Govt. of India.
3.1   Fires
Fires and burning of rubbish on the Site are not permitted except when authorized by Employer. Where fires or burning is permitted, the Contractor shall prevent the structures, which are to be preserved from staining and smoke damage. The Contractor shall restore, clean and make good stained or damaged work to new condition.
3.2   Disposal of Waste and Cleanliness
The Contractor shall not bury rubbish and solid waste materials on the Site and he shall not dispose of waste or volatile materials, such as mineral spirits, oil or paint thinner into the waterways, storm water drainage or sanitary sewers.
The Contractor shall keep all pavements and areas leading to and from the site, clean and free of mud, dirt, and debris at all times for movement of vehicles and pedestrians.
3.3   Drainage
The Contractor shall provide temporary drainage and pumping facilities as necessary to keep the adjoining areas of work site free from water logging and flooding.
3.4   Pollution Control and Environmental Safeguard
The Contractor shall cover or wet down dry materials and rubbish to prevent blowing dust and debris and take dust control measures for temporary roads and yards. The Contractor shall, obtain the N.O.C. regarding Water (Prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 from relevant authorities before starting Crusher/Hot Mix Plant or any other activities that might cause pollution hazard for the work.
4 CONTRACTOR’S LABORATORY & EQUIPMENT
4.1   Field and Quarry Laboratories
The Contractor shall provide two site laboratories, one at the quarry and the other at the project site in order to carry out the specified tests. These laboratories shall be completely staffed and properly equipped to the satisfaction of the Employer’s to carry out the tests as specified.
The Contractor’s site laboratories shall be available for the use of or inspection by the Employer’s. The Employer’s may require his representative to be present at any test and at any time during the working hours of the laboratories.
The Contractor shall furnish and maintain the laboratories, apparatus and supplies necessary to permit execution of the tests required by the Specifications. The Contractor shall submit to the Employer’s for approval, within 30 days from award of Contract, a complete list of theequipment, apparatus and supplies he proposes to provide in the laboratories. The list shall include the manufacturer’s name and descriptive literature.
4.2   Diving Support
The Contractor shall provide fully qualified divers, together with all support equipment, to ensure that all submerged works are constructed in accordance with the drawings and specifications. The Contractor shall submit diving inspection reports to the Employer’s in an agreed format.
5 MAINTENANCE PLAN
5.1   General
The Contractor shall prepare maintenance plan covering all aspects of the works for the review of the Employer’s. This plan shall be prepared to ensure that the design life periods stated are met in full and where no design life periods are stated, the maintenance plan shall be prepared to maximize the serviceable life.
5.2   Maintenance Document
The Contractor shall provide six copies of the maintenance plan and manuals to the Employer’s to retain by the Employer’s upon the request of the Employer’s or for following receipt of attention to the Employer’s 's comments.
6 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULES, SURVEY DATA & DRAWINGS
The Contractor shall prepare and submit construction schedules, survey data, and field drawings to illustrate the appropriate portion of work.  The work items shall be described andrelated to responsibility, fabrication, layout, and setting or erection details as specified in appropriate Sections.
Drawings shall be submitted in one reproducible transparency and two paper prints, maximum size 610 mm x 810 mm and in soft copy on CD (in AutoCAD format).
7. MONTHLY PROGRESS REPORTS
The Contractor shall maintain a daily log describing the important events pertaining to the Works, (the  working  hours,  the  number  of  laborers  employed,  effective  operation  time  of  equipment, overtime hours, delays due to meteorological and maritime conditions, lack of labour, materials or equipment), progress made including those for breakwaters, marine structures and allied facilities works, and instructions, notifications and recommendations made by the Employer’s .
The monthly progress reports shall include progress photographs taken at a fixed point and angle as and when directed by the Employer’s. The photographs shall be sufficient in numbers and locations to record the exact progress of the works. The colour photographs should be in size 200 mm x 250 mm and the DVD containing the digital version of the same shall be provided.
The Contractor shall furnish to the Employer’s with six (6) copies of the monthly progress reports within seven (7) days after the end of every month.
8 AS BUILT DRAWINGS AND FINAL CONSTRUCTION REPORT
Within thirty (30) calendar days after the issuance of the Taking Over Certificate, the Contractor shall prepare and submit two (2) sets of as-built drawings and a final construction report as draft. And within thirty (30) calendar days after the issuance of the Maintenance Certificate, the Contractor shall submit five (5) sets of the Final Construction Report and five (5) sets of Final As-built drawings. As-built drawings of the works consists of one (1) set of original size reproducible (mylar), two (2) sets of original size copies (white print), one (1) set of reproducible (mylar) reduced to A3 size (420 mm x 297 mm) and size (6) sets of bound copies reduced to A3 size. All documents and drawings will be also delivered on CDs (in Auto-CAD format).
9 CO-ORDINATION AND CONFLICT
The contractor shall work on the basis of all drawings, notes and specifications together. He shall verify all dimensions for interrelationship and fit before proceeding with work. In event of conflict he shall consult the Employer’s    prior to start of affected work.  The Employer’s    shall coordinate and resolve such conflicts, if any.
10 	APPROVALS
Contractor shall submit the transmittal letters for Employer’s ’s approval containing the following, but not limited to:
	•	Date and revision dates; project title and number; Contractor’s name and address; sub- Contractor, supplier manufacturer, number of each shop drawing, product data and sample submitted; other pertinent data if required.
	•	Identification   of   product   or   material, dimensions, specifications, sections, applicable standards
	•	Contractor’s stamp, initials or signature certifying compliance with Contract Documents,
The Contractor shall keep a copy of all correspondence at his work site office.  
 11 QUALITY CONTROL AND ASSURANCE
11.1 General
The Contractor shall be required to adopt a system of self-certification in accordance with his general quality plan and the appropriate detailed quality procedures accepted by the Employer’s. The Contractor shall monitor his performance of executing the Works against two levels of certification:
	•	Completion of individual work items and
	•	The completion of activities listed in the Activity Schedule.
In addition to the certification of the completion of work items and activities, the Contractor shall be required to issue the Quality Assurance (QA) certificates concerning the Quality Plan, Quality Procedures and Construction Documents.
11.2 The Contractor’s Quality Manager
The Contractor’s Quality Manager is the person nominated  by the  Contractor responsible  for ensuring  that members  of the  Contractor’s staff  comply with  the quality  requirements of  the Contract and for certifying that completed Work Items and activities comply with the requirements of the Contract. The Quality Manager shall have a minimum of two-year experience in a similar appointment. He shall be full time resident on site.
11.3 Monitoring by the Employer’s 
The Employer’s  will monitor the Contractor’s work against the Contractor’s Quality Plan and Quality procedures. The Employer’s  may do this by spot checks, and/or by continuous monitoring of the work. The Employer’s  may also do this by carrying out compliance audits periodically against the Contractors Quality Procedures. The frequency and intensity of such checks shall depend on the proven reliability of the Contractor as work progresses. Each noncompliance with the Quality Plan shall be notified promptly to the Employer’s , together with proposals for remedy of the non-compliance.
11.4 Improper Certification of Unsatisfactory Work
If a member of the Contractor’s staff repeatedly certifies the work as being satisfactory when that work is less than satisfactory,  and the  Employer’s so  instructs,  that member  of  the Contractor’s staff shall be removed from the work, and shall not be subsequently employed on the Contract.
11.5 Quality Plan and Quality Procedures
The Contractor shall be required to submit his complete General Quality Plan to the Employer’s  for acceptance within four weeks of the Commencement Date, or at least two weeks before any work commences, whichever is sooner. A designer’s quality plan will be accepted as an interim measure to permit design work to be started in advance of the preparation of the General Quality Plan.
Detailed Quality Procedures for each element or item of work must be submitted to the Employer’s for review at least two weeks before that work is due to commence. Detailed Quality Procedures are also required for all items manufactured prior to delivery to site.
11.6 Quality Documents
The Contractor shall submit a Quality Plan Certificate (in duplicate) and Quality Procedures Certificates with the Quality Plan and each Quality Procedure submitted to the Employer’s  for review. Those Quality Document submissions, which are not accompanied by a relevant Quality Document Certificate, will not be reviewed.
The Contractor shall ensure that all Quality Document submissions are in a form that enables the Employer’s to accept the Quality Document as required by the Contract without delaying completion of the Works.
The Employer’s  will return to the Contractor one copy of the relevant Quality Document Certificate accompanying the Quality Document submission endorsed “Received”, “Received with Comments” or marked “Comments” as appropriate. Any “Comments” will be restricted to matters those in the opinion of the Employer’s , relate to non-compliance with the Employer’s ’s Requirements. In the case of any Quality Document returned marked with “Comments”, the Employer’s may also transmit any such comments to the Contractor.
The Contractor is  to proceed  as follows  depending on  whether the  Document is  endorsed “Received”, “Received with Comments” or “Comments”.
Based on the type of endorsement, the Contractor shall take the following actions:
“Received” The Contractor may proceed with implementation.
“Received with Comments” The Contractor and, if appropriate, the Designer, shall amend the 
Quality Document to take account of the “Comments”.
The   amended   Quality   Document   shall   be   made   available    to   the Employer’s . The Contractor may proceed with implementation without the need for re-certification.
“Comments” The Contractor and, as appropriate, the Designer, shall revise the Quality Document and resubmit the amended Quality Document together with a Quality Document Certificate to the Employer’s for review. 
The Contractor shall not proceed with implementation until the  revised document is approved   
The Contractor shall adhere to all Quality Document details once the Quality Document Certificate has been “Received”, or after the details have been amended in accordance with the comments attached to “Received with Comments”.
One copy of all Quality Plan Certificates and of the accompanying Quality Plans that have been “Received” or “Received with Comments” shall be kept on site by the Contractor. These are to be available for inspection and use by the Employer’s and by any other person authorized by the Employer’s .
Any consequences in respect of any revisions arising out of Quality Document Certificates being returned endorsed “Received with Comments” or “Comments” shall not be ground for a claim by the Contractor for additional payment, nor for an extension of the Time for Completion.
11.7 The Designer and his Role in Quality Assurance Matters
For the purposes of Quality Assurance (QA), the Designer is defined as the Design or firm of Design s that is appointed by the Contractor to design the Works in accordance with the Employer’s Requirements.
The Designer is involved in the QA process and is responsible for certifying that his designs have been properly implemented into the final construction of the works.
The Designer’s Representative is the member of the Designer’s staff, resident on site, who is the key person nominated by the Contractor responsible for the design certification aspects in accordance with the Contract quality requirements. The Designer’s Representative shall, prior to appointment, have his experience record submitted to the Employer’s for approval. The experience of Designer’s Representative should as per the requirements stated in the tender document.
The Contractor is required to ensure that the Designer holds current certification from a Certification Body and that the Designer operates a quality management system relevant to the type of work to be carried out.  In case of contractor’s in-house  design team  also,  the above  qualification  and experience requirements shall be complied with by the contractor.
11.8 Submission and Certification of Construction Documents
The Contractor shall submit a Design Certificate  (in  duplicate)  when ever he  is  submitting Construction Documents to the Employer’s  for review. Construction Documents submitted without the relevant Design Certificate will not be reviewed. Where appropriate, a Design Check Certificate shall also be submitted.
The Contractor is to ensure that all Construction Document submissions are in a form that enables the Employer’s to accept the Construction Documents as required by the Contract without delaying completion of the Works.
The Employer’s  will return to the Contractor one copy of the relevant Design Certificate accompanying  the Construction  Documents submission  endorsed  “Received”,  “Received  with Comments” or marked “Comments” as appropriate. Any “Comments” will be restricted to matters those in the opinion of the Employer’s , relate to the non-compliance with the Employer’s ’s Requirements. In the case of any Design Certificate returned marked with “Comments”, the Employer’s  may also transmit any such comments to the Contractor by fax.
The  Contractor shall  proceed as  follows depending  on whether  the Certificate  is  endorsed “Received” The Contractor may proceed with implementation.
“Received with Comments “The Contractor and, if appropriate, the Designer, shall amend the 
Quality Document to take account of the “Comments”.
The   amended   Quality   Document   shall   be   made   available to   the Employer’s . The Contractor may proceed with implementation without the need for re-certification.
“Comments “The Contractor and, as appropriate, the Designer, shall revise the Quality Document and resubmit the amended Quality Document together with a Quality Document Certificate to the Employer’s for review. The Contractor shall not proceed with implementation until the  revised document is approved.

The Contractor shall ad hereto all Construction Document details to which a Design  Certificate relates once that Design Certificate has been “Received”, or after the details have been amended in accordance with the comments attached to “Received with Comments”.
One copy of all Design Certificates and one copy of the accompanying Construction Documents that have been “Received” or “Received with Comments” shall be kept on site by the Contractor. These details are to be made available for inspection and use by the Employer’s  and by any other person authorised by the Employer’s .
Any  consequences in  respect of  any revisions  arising out  of Design  Certificates being  returned endorsed  “Received  with Comments”  or  “Comments”  shall not  be grounds  for a  claim by  the Contractor for additional payment, nor for an extension of the Time for Completion.
11.9 Certificates for Work Item (Sub-activity) Completion
Readily identifiable Work items (Sub-activity) must be certified as checked and found satisfactory by
a) surveyor responsible for checking alignment and setting out, and
b) supervisor responsible for checking temporary works, material cleanliness, dimensions (not checked in (a) above), workmanship and all other matters to enable him to certify that the item of work complies in every respect to the contract.
The Work item Completion Certificate shall be checked and approved by the Contractor’s Quality Manager.
Each Work item Completion Certificate must be identified by a unique and appropriate reference number.
The Work item Completion Certificates shall be filed in a location which is readily accessible for inspection by the Employer’s .
If the Employer’s  is not satisfied that the works have been carried out satisfactorily as certified, the Employer’s  shall raise a non-conformance report to which the contractor shall respond stating his proposals for rectifying the non-conforming item and what action will be taken to prevent recurrence.
Any consequences in respect of any revisions arising out of Work Item (Sub-activity) Completion Certificates being returned with comments shall not be treated as a compensation event.
11.10 Certificate for Activity Completion
When  a section  of work  identified as  an activity  in the  Activity Schedule  has been  completed satisfactorily, the Contractor shall certify that the activity has been completed in accordance with the contract.
The  Activity Completion  Certificate shall  be checked  by the  Contractor’s Quality  Manager  and approved by the Contractor. The Designer’s Representative shall also certify that the activity has been  completed in  compliance with  the relevant  Construction Documents  and the  Employer’s Requirements.
Three copies of the Activity Completion Certificate shall be then sent to the Employer’s .Each  Activity Completion  Certificate shall  be identified  by a  unique and  appropriate  reference number.
The  Employer’s shall  return,  within fourteen  working days,  two copies  of the  Activity Completion certificates duly endorsed to the Contractor with or without comments.
If the Employer’s  is not satisfied that the activity has been completed satisfactorily as certified, the Employer’s  shall enter comments to describe his complaint upon the Activity Completion Certificate. The Contractor shall investigate the cause for complaint and shall investigate remedial measures as appropriate without delay. If the comment by the Employer’s  is such as to require the Contractor to re-submit the Activity Completion Certificate after investigation and implementation of remedial  measures,  the Contractor  shall  re-submit  the Activity  Completion Certificate after the implementation of remedial measures.
The Activity Completion Certificate shall list the reference numbers and dates of Work Item (Sub- Activity) Completion certificates that have been relied upon  by the  signatories to  the  Activity Completion Certificate.
Each Activity Completion Certificate shall have attached to it, copies of any materials test certificates which were received after signing the relevant Work Item Completion Certificates and which have not been submitted to the Employer’s under separate cover during the period between the signing of the Work Item Completion Certificate and the preparation of the Activity Completion Certificate.
If the Employer’s fails to return any Activity Completion Certificate duly endorsed (including any re-submitted Activity Completion Certificate) within fourteen working days, then he is deemed to have returned such Activity Completion Certificate to the Contractor without comments.
Any consequences in respect of any revisions arising out of Activity Completion Certificates being returned with comments shall not be grounds for a claim by the Contractor for additional payment, nor for an extension of the Time for Completion.
The duly completed Activity Completion Certificate endorsed by the Employer’s without any complaint of dissatisfaction shall signify completion of the activity for payment purposes.  The Contractor shall attach the appropriate Activity Completion Certificates to applications for payment made in accordance with the Conditions of Contract.
